Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about a robbery.
But not any robbery.
It has been called the greatest bank
robbery in history, and involves the
sunny seaside city of Nice, sewers, red
wine, suave Frenchmen, gangsters, the
far right, daring escapes, motorbikes,
South America, plastic surgery, and more.
So, let's not waste a minute
and get right into it.
If you have ever been in France during the
weekend of the 14th of July, you will know
that it is one of national celebration.
It is a reminder of the events
of the French Revolution.
There are fireworks, parties, and,
of course, many people take the
opportunity to have a few days off work.
1976 was no exception.
Bastille Day, the 14th of July, fell on a
Wednesday that year, meaning many people
would have partaken in the time-honoured
French tradition of “le pont”, the
bridge, taking the Thursday and Friday
off so as to enjoy a five-day holiday.
The following Monday, Monday 19th
July, as people dragged themselves
back to their places of work, and shops
and offices opened again, a rumour
started to gain momentum in the city
of Nice, on the south coast of France.
There had been a break-in at
the Société Générale bank.
This wasn’t the classic bank robbery
of Hollywood movies, when someone
strolls into the bank, pulls out
a gun, tells everyone to freeze,
and then orders the cashiers to
fill up a suitcase with banknotes.
No, the rumour was that there had been
a break-in in the vault, in the private
deposit boxes deep underneath the bank.
There were thousands of security
boxes, containing, well, the
bank didn’t know exactly.
Everything from jewels to secret documents
to family heirlooms, and of course, cold,
hard cash that someone might have wanted
to keep at the bank “unofficially”.
Journalists started calling up
the bank asking for a statement.
Customers started queuing up outside,
demanding access to their security box,
demanding to speak with the manager.
The thing was, the bank employees
couldn’t get into the vault
containing the security boxes.
The twenty-tonne door seemed jammed shut.
It simply wouldn’t open.
Eventually, they were forced to drill
a hole in the wall of the vault,
finally allowing them to see inside.
And what they found was
nothing short of chaos.
Hundreds of security boxes had been prised
open, their contents all over the floor.
On the wall were scrawled the words, “Ni
armes, ni violence et sans haine”, “No
weapons, no violence, and without hate”.
And it was true.
Nobody seemed to have been
harmed, there had been no hostages
taken, no guns brandished; it
looked to have been a clean job.
So, how did they get in?
Well, as the police looked
around the vault, the answer
was right in front of them.
They found a large hole in
the wall, leading to a tunnel.
They followed the tunnel for eight
metres and found themselves coming
out in the municipal sewer system,
the system that takes away wastewater.
It was an ingenious plan.
The thieves had somehow entered the
sewer system, got to the point closest
to the bank, and tunnelled all the
way through to the wall of the vault,
timing it perfectly for a weekend
they knew would be particularly quiet.
As the police made further inspections
of the raided vault, it became
clear that the criminals had spent
some considerable time there.
The reason that the bank employees hadn’t
been able to open the vault was that the
door had been welded shut, completely
closed to the outside, giving the men
time to escape if they'd been discovered.
They were not, and they had clearly
managed to spend a long time in the vault.
There was a table, which it seemed that
the criminals had used to sort through
the contents of the security boxes,
pocketing anything of monetary value
and discarding anything that wasn’t.
There were even bottles of wine,
paté, a portable gas cooker, tins
of ravioli, and bread crusts.
It seemed like the thieves had spent the
night, perhaps several nights, in the
vault before escaping with their loot.
And how much had been taken?
Well, the bank wasn’t exactly sure.
The thieves had managed to open 371 safety
deposit boxes out of a total of 4,000.
Alongside this, they had managed to
break into the bank’s central reserve
and had taken gold bars and cash.
The haul was estimated at 50 million
francs, equivalent to approximately
40 million Euros in today’s money.
It had all the hallmarks
of a professional job.
Drilling the tunnel and ensuring it
was adequately supported, lit, and
structurally sound was no mean feat.
And as for breaking into the security
boxes, sure, the thieves hadn’t
managed all 4,000 of them, but
still, it was the work of people
who knew what they were doing.
What’s more, they hadn’t
left fingerprints or clues.
As you can imagine, the newspapers went
crazy, giving the criminals a name, “le
gang des égoutiers”, or “the sewer gang”.
But as for the identity of the
perpetrators, the police were
still at something of a loss.
All eyes first turned to a local
organised crime boss called Gaetano
Zampa, but he had a watertight alibi.
It wasn’t him.
What’s more, the message on the wall,
“no weapons, no violence, and without
hate”, this didn’t sound like Zampa.
He was all about weapons and violence.
It wasn’t until several weeks later that
the Nice police got their first clue.
In the countryside around 15km north
of Nice, in fact, a week before
the raid on the bank, local police
had been called by a neighbour who
had reported a group of men acting
suspiciously outside a countryside villa.
The police arrived to
see what was going on.
The men had made up some excuse;
they were going to rent it from
a restaurant owner in a nearby
town, but something smelled fishy.
The police took their IDs, but because
they weren’t committing any crime,
they were released without charge.
And there was another piece of the puzzle.
A month before the raid, police in Nice
had stopped a car one evening after
seeing a pair of men loading the boot with
workman’s tools, the kind of tools you
might use if you were planning a break-in.
When questioned, the men’s
response didn’t make much sense.
Again, fishy, but acting
suspiciously isn’t a crime in itself.
The police realised that the two men
who had been stopped that evening
in Nice were the same as two of the
men who had been acting suspiciously
outside the villa, Daniel Michelucci
and Gérard Vigier, two known criminals.
The problem was that there was no sign
of Daniel Michelucci and Gérard Vigier.
They seemed to have
disappeared into thin air.
The police decided to search the
villa to see if it held any clues.
When they entered, they found traces
of the same mud and soil found in
the Nice sewers, as well as the
same cigarette butts and bottles of
wine that were found in the vault.
Bingo.
It seemed like the villa had been used
as a sort of staging house when planning
the raid, then the criminals had come
back there to divide their spoils.
The problem was that there
was no sign of the men.
The first breakthrough came
three months after the raid.
A man walked into a branch of
Crédit Agricole, casually trying
to sell a handful of gold ingots.
But these weren’t just any ingots;
they were numbered, part of the
stash lifted from the vault in Nice.
The police closed in, arrested
him, and the net began to tighten.
Within two days, two other men,
Francis Pellegrin and Alain
Bournat, were also behind bars.
The police were pleasantly surprised
that these men seemed happy to talk.
But the person they named surprised them.
They said that their boss, the
mastermind of the entire heist, was
someone called Albert Spaggiari.
You can imagine the
detectives’ first reaction.
“Who? Albert Spaggiari?”
The name wasn’t known to the police.
He wasn’t some high-level gangster, he
wasn’t a bank employee, he was…no one.
He was a photographer, and owned a
small photography studio in Nice.
And the police couldn’t see any
links to organised criminals.
Spaggiari had spent time in prison
for a burglary in Vietnam, French
Indochina at the time, but that was 25
years before, when he was 21 years old.
He seemed to be a changed man.
Married.
A popular local wedding photographer.
An upstanding member of society.
Not a criminal mastermind.
What’s more, if Spaggiari was
indeed the mastermind of this great
crime, he wasn’t acting like it.
At the time of the discovery of his
supposed involvement, he was in Japan on
a trip with the then mayor of Nice and
secretary of tourism, Jacques Médecin.
The police waited for him to return,
and when he arrived back in France, on
October 27th, 1976, Albert Spaggiari
was arrested while he was having
lunch at a bar outside the airport.
He acts surprised.
Me?
And the police have to admit,
he doesn’t seem like the type.
If it was him, how did he manage to
control a bunch of serious thugs?
Spaggiari was more of a flaneur, a
cigar-smoking, sunglasses-wearing,
smiling local businessman,
not some hardened criminal.
He denies all involvement, but
there’s something about his
answers that seems suspicious.
As if there’s something
he’s keeping under wraps.
Still, there is no evidence, nothing
actually linking him to the crime.
This all changes when the police
search his isolated countryside
house, more like a small farm.
Inside, they find a veritable weapons
cache: dynamite, guns, and ammunition.
Suddenly, it seems that this
honest, law-abiding photographer
might not be quite what he seems.
Still, he doesn’t talk.
It’s only until the police tell him
that if he doesn’t confess, they’ll
charge his wife as well for possession
of the small arsenal of weapons
that they found at their farmhouse.
For Spaggiari, this is too much.
He says, “OK, you’ve got me”, and
agrees to collaborate with the police.
He was charged and thrown
into jail, awaiting trial.
And he starts talking, he reveals
that he got the idea for the crime a
couple of years beforehand, after he
had heard from a neighbour who worked
at the bank that the vault didn’t have
an alarm or motion detection system.
It was deep underground, its
walls almost 2 metres thick.
The bank simply didn’t think it
was necessary, the neighbour said.
Spaggiari wanted to test whether
this was true, so he rented
a deposit box at the bank.
As a genuine, paying customer, he was
allowed into the vault, where he secretly
took pictures and made detailed notes and
drawings of the interior of the vault.
He also used his lockbox, but not
for cash or jewels; instead, he
placed an alarm clock, setting it to
go off in the middle of the night.
This would allow him to
verify the neighbour’s claim.
He also revealed that the reason for the
heist was more than personal enrichment;
he said that he wanted to raise money
for a relatively unknown far-right
organisation called La Catena, so the
crime took on this political angle too.
Now, whether he was simply inventing
that to add to the legend and make
himself sound less like a simple
thief, I’ll let you be the judge.
The one thing he never does is
reveal the names of his accomplices,
the other members of the crew.
In March the following year, after
four months behind bars, Spaggiari
is at the courthouse in Nice, in
the prosecuting judge’s office.
He has a police escort, of course, but
when he tells the judge that he has
important information regarding the
involvement of local politicians, the
judge asks the police officers to leave.
He knows that policemen talk, and if he
wants to have a confidential conversation
with Spaggiari, he needs to have it alone.
Spaggiari brings out a few sheets
of paper with sketches of a map of
the bank area, names and arrows.
The judge can’t quite understand what is
written there, and he takes a closer look.
But it's all a ruse.
While the judge is trying to make
sense of what Spaggiari has written,
Spaggiari seizes the moment.
He opens the window and jumps out,
falling 8 metres onto a parked car,
then he rolls off, runs across the road,
jumps onto the back of a motorcycle,
and speeds off through central Nice.
This was the 10th of March, 1977,
and Spaggiari is never seen again,
or at least, not by the authorities.
But by this point, he has grown accustomed
to the fame and glamour that come with
being the country’s most famous bank
robber, a sort of real-life Arsène
Lupin, the fictional gentleman-thief.
Journalists love him and his story,
and he revels in the attention.
He even decides to send 5,000 francs
to the person whose car he landed on
after the jump from the magistrate’s
office, as compensation for the damage.
And he went on the run.
To Italy, to Spain, and
then to South America.
He changed his appearance, having plastic
surgery and growing a beard, but he
still couldn’t resist the public eye.
He did a series of interviews from
Madrid in 1983, where he talked about
how he planned to spend his time
smoking cigars and drinking champagne,
surrounded by beautiful women.
He also explained in detail how he
planned and executed the bank heist.
He got the idea, he said, after reading
a novel about a similar crime in the UK.
He had the idea, scouted out the sewage
works, and when he realised he would
need a team to get the job done, he
connected with a local organised crime
gang and offered them half the spoils.
And it was a huge job.
The men worked every night for
three months, taking the equipment
for several kilometres through the
sewer system, wading through human
excrement, waste water, and rats,
before starting the back-breaking
work of digging the tunnel itself.
And the plot, he revealed, was
almost uncovered at the last moment.
Just before the heist was scheduled
to take place, the then-president of
France, Giscard d'Estaing, came to Nice.
Spaggiari feared that the police
would do a sweep of the sewers
along the president’s route and
discover the tunnel, but they didn’t.
He also revealed how the criminals
almost never got out of the tunnel.
It had rained very heavily that
weekend, and the sewers were very
full, practically overflowing.
The men had to make several trips
back and forth from the vault to
carry off all their ill-gotten gains.
The sewage water was up to their necks,
and it was flowing so fast that it was
quite a task to walk against the current,
back to the vault, to get the booty.
Now, despite this playboy,
gentleman-thief image, Spaggiari had
clearly committed a serious crime.
In 1979, he was sentenced to life
imprisonment, in absentia, so if he was
ever caught by the police, he knew that
this was the sentence that awaited him.
In fact, he didn’t live for long.
He had been a heavy smoker his
entire life, and on June 9th, 1989,
lung cancer got the better of him.
He was 56 years old.
Now, since his death, theories have
emerged suggesting that Spaggiari
might not have been the criminal
mastermind he made out to be.
In 2010, a well-known Marseille gangster
called Jacques Cassandri published
a book claiming that he was the
mastermind behind the heist, and that
he made the equivalent of €2 million
from the raid, which he quickly spent.
But as the statute of limitations
had passed, he could no longer
be charged with the crime.
Instead, he got 30 months behind bars
for a different crime, money laundering.
As for Spaggiari, he is remembered in
popular culture both as this successful
robber, but also as something of a
Narcissus, a vain man who craved attention
and fame more than anything else.
And the irony of it all was that,
after becoming something of a celebrity
and getting addicted to it, he had to
stay out of the limelight to survive.
According to one of his former friends,
and one of the men who helped him
escape on the motorcycle, he was
actually quite lonely and bored.
Behind the headlines, the
glamour, and the mystery, what
remained was a rather sad figure.
A man who pulled off one of the
most audacious bank robberies of
the 20th century, but who spent his
final years hiding, sick, and alone.
It is, perhaps, not such a
glamorous ending after all.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Albert Spaggiari.
I hope it was a fun one and that
you’ve learned something new.
If you like these types of episodes,
there are actually quite a few
others about famous criminals:
there’s one on Bonnie and Clyde,
John Dillinger, and the Kray Twins.
I’ll put the links to those in the
show notes, in case you’re interested.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.